---
title: "Chip design from the bottom up – Reiner Pope"
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oIk3R-sMX5o
kol: dwarkesh
channel: "Dwarkesh Patel"
upload_date: 20260522
duration_minutes: 80
subtitle: en (人工)
fetched: 2026-07-16
---

[00:00:00] I'm back with Reiner Pope, CEO&nbsp; of MatX, a new AI chip company.&nbsp; Last time we were talking about&nbsp; what happens inside a data center.&nbsp; Now I want to understand what&nbsp; happens inside an AI chip.&nbsp; How does a chip actually work? Full disclosure, by the way:&nbsp;&nbsp; I am an angel investor in MatX. So hopefully you have designed a good chip.&nbsp; Hope so. I'll start with the smallest&nbsp; fundamental unit of chip design, and we'll&nbsp;&nbsp; build up to what an actual production&nbsp; chip is and what its components are.&nbsp; At the very bottom level of a chip, the&nbsp; primitives we work with are logic gates,&nbsp;&nbsp; very simple things like AND, OR, and NOT. These are connected together by wires that have to&nbsp;&nbsp; be laid out physically as metal traces on a chip. The main function that AI chips want to compute&nbsp;&nbsp; is the multiplication of matrices. Inside that, the fundamental primitive&nbsp;&nbsp; is a multiply-accumulate of pairs of numbers. We're going to demonstrate what that calculation&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:01:01] looks like by hand, and then infer what&nbsp; a circuit would look like for that.&nbsp; It'll be easiest if I do a multiply-accumulate of&nbsp; a four-bit number with another four-bit number.&nbsp; The clearest primitive is&nbsp; actually multiply-accumulate.&nbsp; So there's a multiply of these two terms, and&nbsp; then we're going to add in an eight-bit number.&nbsp; Can I ask a clarifying question? Why is this the natural primitive for&nbsp;&nbsp; whatever computation happens inside a computer? There are a few reasons.&nbsp; It's a little bit more efficient, but the&nbsp; reason it's natural for AI chips is that if&nbsp;&nbsp; you look at what's happening during a matrix&nbsp; multiply… What is a matrix multiply in short?&nbsp;
[00:02:09] There's a for-loop over i, over&nbsp; j, and over k, of output [i,&nbsp;&nbsp; k] += input [i, j] x other input [j, k]. A multiply-accumulate happens at every&nbsp;&nbsp; single step of a matrix multiply. The other observation is that the&nbsp;&nbsp; precision will almost always be higher in the&nbsp; accumulation step than in the multiplication step.&nbsp; This is specific to AI chips. You're multiplying low-precision numbers,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then when you accumulate, errors accumulate&nbsp; quickly, so you need more precision there.&nbsp; This is why we've chosen to do a four-bit&nbsp; multiplication and an eight-bit addition.&nbsp; Let me make sure I understood that. There are two ways to understand that.&nbsp; One is that the value will&nbsp; be larger than the inputs.&nbsp; The other is that if it was a&nbsp; floating-point number it would be…&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:03:10] Maybe that part is less intuitive to me. But maybe it's the same principle?&nbsp; It really is the same principle. The separate principle is that as&nbsp;&nbsp; you're summing up this number, you're summing&nbsp; up a whole bunch of numbers, so you've got a&nbsp;&nbsp; lot of rounding errors accumulating. Whereas in this case, there's only&nbsp;&nbsp; one multiplication in the chain,&nbsp; so there aren't a lot of rounding&nbsp;&nbsp; errors accumulating in the multiplication. Why are you summing up a whole bunch of numbers?&nbsp; There’s just two numbers there. This summation is repeated j many times.&nbsp; Any errors accumulate. I see. So how would we perform this calculation by hand?&nbsp; As a human, we would probably&nbsp; separate it into two, but we can do&nbsp;&nbsp; it all in one using long multiplication. For the multiplication term first, we're&nbsp;&nbsp; going to multiply this four-bit number by every&nbsp; single bit position in the other four-bit number.&nbsp; We write that out. First, 1001&nbsp; multiplied by this bit position.&nbsp;
[00:04:10] That is the number itself. Then shifted across by one,&nbsp;&nbsp; we're multiplying by 0. That gives us an all-0 number.&nbsp; Shifted across one more to&nbsp; multiply by this one, we get 1001.&nbsp; Finally, for this last bit position,&nbsp; we get an all-0 number again.&nbsp; This gives us a bunch of terms that&nbsp; we have to add for the multiplication.&nbsp; While we're doing that summation, we might as&nbsp; well add in the actual accumulator term as well.&nbsp; So we just copy that directly across. So this is the sum.&nbsp; It's a five-way sum that we want to compute.&nbsp; What logic gates did it take us&nbsp; to get to this intermediate step?&nbsp;
[00:05:12] We needed to produce all 16&nbsp; of these partial products.&nbsp; How do I produce one of these partial products? Let's take this number 1, for example here.&nbsp; We produce it by multiplying this&nbsp; number by this one over here.&nbsp; We can produce that with an AND gate. This number is 1 if both this bit&nbsp;&nbsp; is 1 and this bit is 1. If either of them is 0,&nbsp;&nbsp; then the multiplication of 0 times anything is 0. To produce all of this, we ended up&nbsp;&nbsp; consuming 16 AND gates. In the general case,&nbsp;&nbsp; if I were doing a p bit multiply times a q bit&nbsp; multiply, this will be p times q many ANDs.&nbsp; Finally, I sum them. Most of the work&nbsp; is going to happen in the summing.&nbsp;
[00:06:15] Let me describe the other&nbsp; logic gate that we use here.&nbsp; AND is almost the simplest logic&nbsp; gate that exists on a chip.&nbsp; It's almost the smallest. At the other extreme,&nbsp; the very largest logic gate you'll typically use&nbsp;&nbsp; is something called a full adder. Coming from software, you might think&nbsp;&nbsp; that a full adder adds 32-bit numbers together. In this case, it just adds three single-bit&nbsp;&nbsp; numbers together, so you can think&nbsp; of it as adding 0, 1, and 1 together.&nbsp; When I add these together, the result can&nbsp; be 0, 1, 2, or 3, so I can express that&nbsp;&nbsp; in binary using just two bits. As input, it has three bits.&nbsp; As output, it has two bits. The number 2 in binary is 10.&nbsp; This is also known as a 3→2 compressor&nbsp; because it takes three bits of input&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:07:17] and produces two bits of output. Just to make sure I understood: the&nbsp;&nbsp; two inputs are an X and a Y value&nbsp; and then some carry that came in…&nbsp; The three inputs are all bits in the same bit&nbsp; position, like three bits in a column here.&nbsp; The two outputs, I've drawn them vertically&nbsp; here and horizontally here to match this&nbsp;&nbsp; vertical versus horizontal layout. This expresses that things in the same&nbsp;&nbsp; column are in the same bit position, whereas&nbsp; things in adjacent columns are different.&nbsp; This is a carry out, whereas this was the sum. So if the inputs in the full adder were, say,&nbsp;&nbsp; 101, then the output would be 10. If it were 111, it'd be 11.&nbsp; If it were 000, it'd be 00. If it were 010, it'd still be 01.&nbsp; Got it. Yeah. It's essentially just counting the&nbsp;&nbsp; number of things and expressing that in binary. This circuit captures what we as humans naturally&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:08:17] do when we're summing along a column. I'll show one iteration of using&nbsp;&nbsp; the full adder to sum. The way I sum here is going&nbsp;&nbsp; to be a little unnatural for humans. We would sum along the column and then&nbsp;&nbsp; remember the carry, but instead of remembering&nbsp; the carry, we'll explicitly write it out.&nbsp; We proceed from the rightmost&nbsp; column toward the left.&nbsp; On the rightmost column, we sum the 1 and the 1,&nbsp; and that produces a zero here and a carry of one.&nbsp; We've used this full adder circuit on this pair&nbsp; of bits and produced a pair of bits as output.&nbsp; Now we can do the same thing with this column. We have a column of four numbers, so we'll take&nbsp;&nbsp; the first three of them, run a full adder on&nbsp; them, and that gives us a 0 and a 0 as output.&nbsp; The sum of these is 00. That's the full adder applied to all these bits.&nbsp;
[00:09:18] As I've used up bits, I'll cross them&nbsp; out to indicate that I've handled them.&nbsp; Let's keep going a little bit more. I take these three numbers, I add&nbsp;&nbsp; them, and that gives me a 1 and a 0. I've dealt with these three numbers.&nbsp; Now I take these three numbers and add&nbsp; them, and that gives me a 1 and a 0,&nbsp;&nbsp; and I've dealt with these numbers. The way to view this is that I have&nbsp;&nbsp; this whole grid of numbers that need to be added. I'm going to keep applying full adders to all the&nbsp;&nbsp; bits here, constantly removing three numbers from&nbsp; a column and writing out two numbers as output.&nbsp; Keep going over and over again until I&nbsp; eventually get just one single number coming out.&nbsp; This approach is called a Dadda multiplier. This is the standard for how you do&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:10:31] area-efficient multipliers using full adders. Let's try to quantify the circuit size of&nbsp;&nbsp; this so we have a sense of how big&nbsp; things are and can compare them later.&nbsp; How many full adders did I use? How many numbers did I start with?&nbsp; I have the 16 partial products, which is a product&nbsp; of all of these terms with all of these terms,&nbsp;&nbsp; plus the eight terms that I'm adding here. I started off with 24 bits.&nbsp; Eventually I produced eight bits on the output. In every step, I was crossing off three numbers&nbsp;&nbsp; and writing two numbers out as a result. Every single use of a full adder eliminates&nbsp;&nbsp; one of the bits here. So how many full adders?&nbsp; It must be 24 minus 8, so there&nbsp; were 16 full adders in this circuit.&nbsp; This is true in the general case as well. There will be p times q many&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:11:34] full adders in this circuit. Let me make sure I understand the logic of that.&nbsp; The input bits, 24, is p x q, plus p + q. The output bits are just p + q.&nbsp; So p x q plus p + q, minus p + q equals p x q. That's right. I think this explains,&nbsp;&nbsp; or at least hints at, the second reason&nbsp; we chose to do a multiply-accumulate.&nbsp; The first reason is that it's what&nbsp; shows up in matrix multiplication.&nbsp; The second is that it gave us this very&nbsp; slick, simple p x q, very simple algebra.&nbsp; We've described this whole procedure. Every single atomic step that I took&nbsp;&nbsp; here becomes a logic gate, and then&nbsp; the wires are connected together.&nbsp; When I had these three inputs that I used to&nbsp; produce these two outputs, if I think of mapping&nbsp;&nbsp; this to a physical device, there would be a wire&nbsp; connecting all three of these things together&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:12:38] into a logic gate that produced this output. This is the main primitive, at different bit&nbsp;&nbsp; widths, that's inside an AI chip. We're going to build up from here&nbsp;&nbsp; to how you would use it to run all&nbsp; the other operations you might want.&nbsp; This might be the wrong time to ask, but&nbsp; whenever Nvidia reports that this chip&nbsp;&nbsp; can do X many FP4 or half as many FP8, it&nbsp; seems to imply those circuits are fungible,&nbsp;&nbsp; that there's not a dedicated FP4 versus FP8. But the way you're mapping it out here, it seems&nbsp;&nbsp; like if it has to be mapped out in the logic, you&nbsp; would need a dedicated FP4 multiply-accumulate and&nbsp;&nbsp; then a dedicated FP8 accumulate. Can you "funge" them?&nbsp; As drawn, they're not particularly fungible. This is actually one of the main choices you&nbsp;&nbsp; have to make when designing a chip: how&nbsp; much of FP4 and how much of FP8 do I have?&nbsp;
[00:13:42] Sometimes I'll make that consideration from&nbsp; the point of view of the customer requirement.&nbsp; Another angle is to equalize the&nbsp; power budget between FP4 and FP8.&nbsp; When they report those numbers and it just happens&nbsp; to be the case that it does 2x as many FP4 as FP8,&nbsp;&nbsp; they're just choosing to give equivalent&nbsp; die areas to all the floating points,&nbsp;&nbsp; and as a result it ends up being…? Why is the ratio exactly 2x?&nbsp; Part of it is that surely it won't&nbsp; be exactly equivalent to die area.&nbsp; There's a data movement reason. We'll maybe come back to this when we&nbsp;&nbsp; look at how it goes into and out of memories. There's something really nice from a software&nbsp;&nbsp; level about the fact that I can pack&nbsp; two four-bit numbers into the same&nbsp;&nbsp; storage as an eight-bit number. When I store that to memory,&nbsp;&nbsp; the sizing of the buses that I wire out within&nbsp; the chip makes that work out really nicely.&nbsp;
[00:14:44] Come to think of it, it's not just 2x. The amount of area it takes sounds like&nbsp;&nbsp; it's quadratic with the bit length. That's why smaller precision is even&nbsp;&nbsp; more favorable than you might think. This is a really big reason.&nbsp; In fact, Nvidia made a change. Historically, up until B100 or&nbsp;&nbsp; B200, every time you halved the bit&nbsp; precision, you doubled the FLOP count.&nbsp; For the reason you said, because of this quadratic&nbsp; scaling, that ratio is actually slightly wrong.&nbsp; You should get an even bigger speedup&nbsp; than you might otherwise think.&nbsp; Nvidia’s product specs have started acknowledging&nbsp; that in B300 and beyond, where the FP4 is three&nbsp;&nbsp; times faster than the FP8. Though it should be 4x.&nbsp; Yeah. What I've shown here is the&nbsp; simplest case of integer multiply.&nbsp; When you're dealing with floating point, as&nbsp; you do in FP4 and FP8, there's this other term,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:15:49] the exponent, that complicates the calculation. What can we see already from this?&nbsp; I think the big observation you've made is that&nbsp; there's this quadratic scaling with bit width,&nbsp;&nbsp; which is very effective and is&nbsp; the single reason low-precision&nbsp;&nbsp; arithmetic has worked so well for neural nets. The other thing we're going to do now is compare&nbsp;&nbsp; the area spent on the multiplication&nbsp; itself with all the circuitry around it.&nbsp; We'll walk back in time a little bit and&nbsp; see how GPUs prior to Tensor Cores worked,&nbsp;&nbsp; which is in fact the same way CPUs worked. Where do we stick this multiply-accumulate unit?&nbsp; Generically, I'll describe a CUDA core or a CPU. You'll have some register file which stores some&nbsp;&nbsp; number of entries, maybe eight entries of, in this&nbsp; case, 4-bit numbers, but typically 32-bit numbers.&nbsp;
[00:17:03] Inside the CUDA core, I'll have&nbsp; some register file of some depth,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then I'll have my multiply-accumulate circuit. What it's going to do is take three arbitrary&nbsp;&nbsp; registers from this register file,&nbsp; perform the multiply-accumulate,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then write back to the register file. It's going to write to this one,&nbsp;&nbsp; but it was able to read from this&nbsp; one, this one, and another random one.&nbsp; It will take three inputs like this. This is the core data path of many processors.&nbsp; Most processors look like this. You've got some set of registers, and&nbsp;&nbsp; then you've got some set of logic units, or ALUs. We want to analyze the cost of the data movement&nbsp;&nbsp; from the register file to the ALU and back. Ultimately, there's going to be some&nbsp;&nbsp; circuit that says, "Well, I don't&nbsp; always have to select this guy.&nbsp; I might select any of the&nbsp; registers at any point in time."&nbsp;
[00:18:04] The first question is: how can I build a circuit? The circuit I'm going to look for is a mux.&nbsp; In this case, it's going to have eight inputs,&nbsp; one from each entry of the register file,&nbsp;&nbsp; and it's going to have one output,&nbsp; which is actually producing this output.&nbsp; What is the cost of this thing? All we have to build it out of is AND and OR.&nbsp; How do we build it? We do the dumbest thing possible.&nbsp; We form a mask. When we want to read the&nbsp; third entry, we're going to AND every&nbsp;&nbsp; single entry with either 1 or 0 based&nbsp; on whether that's what we want to read,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then we're going to OR all of them together. Just to make sure I understand the basics.&nbsp; What the mux is doing is just selecting an input? Just selecting, invisible to software.&nbsp; You say "I want input number three,"&nbsp; and that means there's a mux here.&nbsp; So what is the cost of this mux? An n-input&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:19:10] mux operating on p bits. I have n rows. That's just eight&nbsp;&nbsp; rows, and each row is p bits wide. I have to AND every single bit,&nbsp;&nbsp; so I get n x p many AND gates. For every single input I have to decide&nbsp;&nbsp; whether I'm going to mask it out or not. Then I'm going to OR them all together.&nbsp; There's going to be n – 1 times p many OR gates. I've got all of these different things,&nbsp;&nbsp; almost all of them are 0s, but I need to collapse&nbsp; them from my eight options down into one option.&nbsp; Every step, I need to OR one&nbsp; row into an existing row.&nbsp; It's actually funny that you don't&nbsp; think at the level of hardware.&nbsp; You just think, "Oh, I'll just select element&nbsp; three," and something as simple as that is&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:20:11] in and of itself quite a complicated circuit. This is the first step of all of the hidden&nbsp;&nbsp; data movement costs that show up. We're just going to compare.&nbsp; I have to pay this cost. I've got one mux here, and in fact&nbsp;&nbsp; I have two more copies of that for each of the&nbsp; three inputs to my multiply-accumulate operation.&nbsp; I have this cost, which is 3 x n x p AND gates&nbsp; over here, compared to p x q gates in the actual&nbsp;&nbsp; circuit that is doing the thing I care about. If we plug in actual numbers, with n being&nbsp;&nbsp; eight, I get 24 x p gates just in the data&nbsp; movement, compared to—if q is four—4 x p&nbsp;&nbsp; gates just in the multiply-adder. Where is the three coming from?&nbsp; Three different inputs here. What I'm&nbsp; hinting at is that all of this work,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:21:14] which scales as the size of the register&nbsp; file—and this is a very small register&nbsp;&nbsp; file—all of this work just moving the data from&nbsp; the register file to the logic unit is many,&nbsp;&nbsp; many times more expensive than the logic unit. In the most recent ClusterMAX report, SemiAnalysis&nbsp;&nbsp; ranked almost 100 different GPU clouds. Crusoe&nbsp; was one of only five that made the gold tier.&nbsp; SemiAnalysis found that gold-tier providers&nbsp; like Crusoe had a total cost of ownership that&nbsp;&nbsp; was 5% to 15% lower than silver-tier ones,&nbsp; even when they had identical GPU pricing.&nbsp; This makes sense because total cost of ownership&nbsp; is downstream of a bunch of different things that&nbsp;&nbsp; don't necessarily show up in the sticker&nbsp; price, but that Crusoe has optimized.&nbsp; Things like how well you detect faults&nbsp; and how quickly you replace failed nodes.&nbsp; For example, Crusoe was one of the first clouds&nbsp; to adopt NVSentinel, NVIDIA's own GPU monitoring&nbsp;&nbsp; and self-healing software for enhanced&nbsp; GPU uptime, utilization, and reliability.&nbsp; This lets Crusoe make use of everything that&nbsp; NVIDIA has learned about why chips fail across all&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:22:14] their different fleets and deployments, so that&nbsp; Crusoe can catch faults earlier in the process.&nbsp; And once they identify a failure, Crusoe can&nbsp; swap in a healthy node in less than 10 minutes.&nbsp; Because they’re not running bare metal, Crusoe&nbsp; doesn't have to spend time installing an&nbsp;&nbsp; operating system or configuring drivers. They can just spin up a new VM on an&nbsp;&nbsp; already running and pre-qualified host. If you want to learn more about this or&nbsp;&nbsp; the other reasons that Crusoe made&nbsp; gold tier, go to crusoe.ai/dwarkesh.&nbsp; It may be helpful to just&nbsp; see what a mux looks like,&nbsp;&nbsp; maybe a two-bit or a four-bit mux. We’ll do a two-way mux.&nbsp; We've got two different numbers,&nbsp; we’ve got these two inputs.&nbsp; These are the inputs that are being selected&nbsp; between, and the selector can either be "I want&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:23:16] this one" or "I want the other one." This is a one-hot encoding.&nbsp; This is what we start with. Let's focus on this case.&nbsp; This is the actual input we got, and we&nbsp; want to produce this guy as the result.&nbsp; Very laboriously, we AND&nbsp; this bit with all of these.&nbsp; That produces ANDing this bit with this row. Likewise, we AND this bit with this row.&nbsp; That produces all 0s. There are four ANDs here. Finally,&nbsp;&nbsp; we OR these two together, and this gives a 1. We OR these two together, this gives a 1.&nbsp; We OR these two together, it gives a 0. We OR these two together and it gives a 1.&nbsp; Those are the four ORs. This actually ends up&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:24:22] looking a little bit like addition. We did exactly the same set of ANDs.&nbsp; We've ANDed all of these things together,&nbsp; but then instead of collapsing it by using&nbsp;&nbsp; full adder circuits, we just get a&nbsp; very simple collapsing with OR gates.&nbsp; But that doesn't look like n times p. This was with n=2 inputs.&nbsp; In the general case, we will have n&nbsp; rows, and we'll have p bits per row.&nbsp; That gives us the n times p many AND gates. In this circuit I've described, almost all of&nbsp;&nbsp; the cost, seven-eighths of the cost, is in reading&nbsp; and writing the register file, and only a tiny&nbsp;&nbsp; fraction of the cost is in the logic unit itself. This is the problem to solve.&nbsp;
[00:25:24] This essentially was the state of play prior&nbsp; to the Volta generation of Nvidia GPUs.&nbsp; This kind of thing is what&nbsp; was inside the CUDA cores.&nbsp; This problem statement is what motivated&nbsp; the introduction of Tensor Cores,&nbsp;&nbsp; which are more generically called systolic arrays. Think about how we're going to solve this problem.&nbsp; We're spending almost all of our&nbsp; circuit area on something that we&nbsp;&nbsp; really don't care about and is hidden to the&nbsp; software programmer, and the thing that we&nbsp;&nbsp; actually care about is not much of the area. Make this one bigger somehow while keeping&nbsp;&nbsp; this at the same size. That's the goal.&nbsp; The evolution was that we had baked&nbsp; this much into hardware at this stage.&nbsp; This single line is a multiply-accumulate,&nbsp; and this single thing was baked into hardware.&nbsp; The idea of a systolic array is to go&nbsp; two levels of loops up and bake this&nbsp;&nbsp; entire loop out here into hardware. The idea is that if we have a much&nbsp;&nbsp; bigger granularity fixed-function&nbsp; piece of logic, maybe the taxes we&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:26:27] pay on the input and output are much smaller. Interesting. It sounds like you're suggesting&nbsp;&nbsp; that if you go up one step in the matrix&nbsp; multiply loop, you can tilt the balance&nbsp;&nbsp; more towards compute than communication. That's right. There are two effects we're&nbsp;&nbsp; going to take advantage of here. One is that we can do more stuff&nbsp;&nbsp; per every trip through our register file. The other is that in some of this loop, we can&nbsp;&nbsp; take advantage of certain things staying fixed. Visually, we're going to look at this&nbsp;&nbsp; matrix multiplication. This portion of the loop&nbsp;&nbsp; corresponds to a matrix-vector multiplication. We'll take a matrix and multiply it by a vector.&nbsp; How do we do this? Every column gets&nbsp;&nbsp; multiplied by the vector and then summed. We're going to sum along columns.&nbsp;
[00:27:28] This 0 and 3 gets multiplied by the 3 and&nbsp; 7 and gets summed, and then the 1 and 2&nbsp;&nbsp; gets multiplied by the 3 and 7 and gets summed. There is a multiply-accumulate associated with&nbsp;&nbsp; every single one of these entries in the matrix. We'll draw out these four multiply-accumulates.&nbsp; Just to make sure I understand why there are&nbsp; four multiply-accumulates: each entry in the&nbsp;&nbsp; column that corresponds to the output&nbsp; vector is a dot product, and in this&nbsp;&nbsp; case it will be two multiplications and then&nbsp; the addition of those two multiplications.&nbsp; You're accumulating... Really there's only one addition per&nbsp;&nbsp; dot product, but we like to start with zero. But it includes the initialization of zero.&nbsp; Yeah. We want to have quadratically more compute.&nbsp;
[00:28:30] We have x times y as much&nbsp; compute as we had before.&nbsp; But we want to aim for having only&nbsp; x times as much communication.&nbsp; The intention is to get this&nbsp; advantage term going as y.&nbsp; We've laid down the multiplications. We want to bring in a vector of size two, and&nbsp;&nbsp; that is already in line with our columns target. That's fine. However, we need to manage the&nbsp;&nbsp; communication of this matrix,&nbsp; which exceeds our budget of x.&nbsp; The idea is that in an AI context, this matrix&nbsp; is going to stay fixed for a long period of time.&nbsp; We've got some register files sitting over here. The amount of stuff coming out of this register&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:29:36] file… this is the term that we&nbsp; want to go as x, in some sense.&nbsp; We don't want to bring this full matrix&nbsp; in from the register file every cycle,&nbsp;&nbsp; because that would cost too much in&nbsp; terms of wiring from the register file.&nbsp; Our key trick is that this matrix can&nbsp; be stored locally to the systolic array.&nbsp; We'll store these numbers 0, 1, 2, and 3&nbsp; in a gate called a register that physically&nbsp;&nbsp; stores these numbers, and we're going to&nbsp; reuse these numbers over and over again&nbsp;&nbsp; for a large number of different vectors. The optimization here is that the nature of&nbsp;&nbsp; matrix multiplication is that you can store this&nbsp; square quadratic thing directly where the logic is&nbsp;&nbsp; happening, which has an extra dimension compared&nbsp; to the inputs that you keep swapping in and out.&nbsp;
[00:30:45] That’s right. This is the nature of&nbsp;&nbsp; what a matrix multiplication is. You do a lot of multiplication&nbsp;&nbsp; to get one value out. A dot product is the&nbsp;&nbsp; result of a lot of multiplications. So that optimization means you can&nbsp;&nbsp; stuff a lot of multiplication in&nbsp; before you get some value out of it.&nbsp; That's right. Just to complete the&nbsp; picture of concretely how that looks:&nbsp;&nbsp; I swapped the 3 and the 2 here. Just like this 0 and 3 is going&nbsp;&nbsp; to multiply by the 3 and the 7, we're going&nbsp; to form a dot product along columns here.&nbsp; We're going to feed a 3 and a 7 in here. This feeds into this multiplication and also&nbsp;&nbsp; feeds into this multiplication. Likewise, the 3 feeds&nbsp;&nbsp; into here and also into here. Then we're going to sum along here.&nbsp;
[00:31:49] Starting at the top of a column, we feed in 0s,&nbsp; and then coming out the bottom we get results.&nbsp; Visually, there's a dot product performed along&nbsp; columns in a matrix, and that maps exactly to&nbsp;&nbsp; what is done spatially in the systolic array. This is one dot product summed vertically,&nbsp;&nbsp; and this is a second dot&nbsp; product also summed vertically.&nbsp; What is the data that needs to go&nbsp; into and out of the register file?&nbsp; We have x amount of data coming&nbsp; out on the output, and we also&nbsp;&nbsp; have x amount of data coming from the input. With respect to the input and output vectors&nbsp;&nbsp; at least, we've met our goal of having only x as&nbsp; much data going in and out of the register file.&nbsp; This leaves open the question: I said the&nbsp; weight matrix is stored locally in the systolic&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:32:51] array, so how did it get there in the first place? At some point, you need to boot your chip and&nbsp;&nbsp; populate this data, so where did that come from? The trick is that we just do it very slowly.&nbsp; We very slowly trickle-feed&nbsp; it into the systolic array.&nbsp; The simplest strategy is that we run&nbsp; this daisy chain: feed a number in here,&nbsp;&nbsp; and on the next clock cycle it will move&nbsp; down to the next entry of the systolic array.&nbsp; We can do that in every column in parallel,&nbsp; this is also going to come from here,&nbsp;&nbsp; and that gives us another factor of&nbsp; approximately x units of bandwidth coming in.&nbsp; Would you mind repeating&nbsp; that sentence one more time?&nbsp; We know that we're going to be bringing&nbsp; numbers only rarely into the matrix.&nbsp; We just want to come up with any construction&nbsp; at all such that the amount of wiring that&nbsp;&nbsp; crosses the boundary of the systolic&nbsp; array is bounded to x and not go as xy.&nbsp;
[00:33:56] A particularly simple strategy is that&nbsp; we bring a number into the top row of&nbsp;&nbsp; the systolic array in one clock cycle. Then, for y consecutive clock cycles,&nbsp;&nbsp; we bring in the top row every time and&nbsp; shift all the other rows down by one.&nbsp; This keeps the wiring that needs to&nbsp; come from this expensive register file&nbsp;&nbsp; only down to a factor of x rather than xy. I see. There are two questions in terms&nbsp;&nbsp; of communication: communication&nbsp; time and communication bandwidth.&nbsp; You're saying that since we're only going to be&nbsp; loading this in once, let's minimize bandwidth,&nbsp;&nbsp; because bandwidth equals die area. We load it in slowly over smaller&nbsp;&nbsp; lanes because we're just going to&nbsp; keep this value in there for a while.&nbsp; Exactly. It's interesting to me that when we were talking&nbsp;&nbsp; last time about inference across many chips, the&nbsp; big high-level thing we're trying to optimize for&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:34:58] is increasing the amount of compute per memory&nbsp; bandwidth, that is to say, per communication.&nbsp; Here also, we're trying to increase&nbsp; the amount of actual multiplies&nbsp;&nbsp; or additions relative to transporting&nbsp; information from registers to the logic.&nbsp; In both cases, you're trying to maximize&nbsp; compute relative to communication.&nbsp; This shows up all the way up and down the stack. This is close to the bottom, to the gates.&nbsp; There's a version that's maybe even closer&nbsp; to the gates in the precision of the number&nbsp;&nbsp; format that you choose to use. We saw that same effect.&nbsp; There's a squared versus linear term going&nbsp; on both purely in the precision of the ALU,&nbsp;&nbsp; but also in the size of the matrix. This unit is the next bigger unit.&nbsp; We had the multiplication circuit, and on top&nbsp; of that we have a pretty large systolic array.&nbsp;
[00:36:01] I drew it as 2x2, but older TPUs were described&nbsp; as 128x128 of this circuit shown here.&nbsp; This ends up being the most efficient known&nbsp; circuit for implementing a matrix multiply.&nbsp; We've talked about how it seems&nbsp; obvious that you should try to&nbsp;&nbsp; maximize compute relative to communication. What are non-obvious trade-offs that&nbsp;&nbsp; keep you up at night, about whether you should do&nbsp; X or Y and it's not obvious what the answer is?&nbsp; Most of the decisions in chip&nbsp; design are sizing decisions.&nbsp; Already in what we've drawn so far… AI&nbsp; chips all have this circuit in them.&nbsp; They have a systolic array, and somewhere near&nbsp; it a register file providing inputs and outputs.&nbsp;
[00:37:06] Even within this scope, the sizing questions you&nbsp; have are: how big should I make my systolic array,&nbsp;&nbsp; and how big should I make the register file? These two questions are coupled.&nbsp; One way to think of it is to set a&nbsp; budget for what percentage of chip&nbsp;&nbsp; area you want to spend on data movement. Maybe I say that I want this to be 10%&nbsp;&nbsp; and the systolic array to be 90%. Then I can size my register file.&nbsp; Bigger register files are more flexible. They allow me to get more application-level&nbsp;&nbsp; performance out, but they take away from&nbsp; the area spent on the systolic array.&nbsp; I recently ran an essay contest where I asked&nbsp; people to write about what I consider to be some&nbsp;&nbsp; of the biggest open questions about AI. The submission window closed last week,&nbsp;&nbsp; so I used Cursor to create a couple of different&nbsp; interfaces to help me review the entries.&nbsp;
[00:38:07] One interface anonymizes submissions&nbsp; and hides the necessary information.&nbsp; It lets me group responses by question,&nbsp; add notes, and record my scores.&nbsp; The other interface helps me review&nbsp; entrants who also want to be considered&nbsp;&nbsp; for the researcher role that I'm hiring for. The UI puts the applicant's essay right next&nbsp;&nbsp; to their resume and their personal website&nbsp; so that I can see everything at once.&nbsp; Cursor's harness is really good at helping&nbsp; these models see and improve their UIs.&nbsp; I watched it render these interfaces in&nbsp; the built-in browser, take screenshots,&nbsp;&nbsp; click through sections, and keep iterating. At this point,&nbsp;&nbsp; Cursor is where I do most of my work. Whether I'm reading and visualizing a bunch&nbsp;&nbsp; of research papers, or coding up an interface to&nbsp; review applications, or making flashcards for my&nbsp;&nbsp; blackboard lectures, Cursor just makes it very&nbsp; easy for an AI to look at whatever I'm looking at&nbsp;&nbsp; and help me understand it and work with me on it. So whatever you're working on,&nbsp;&nbsp; you should do it in Cursor. Go to cursor.com/dwarkesh.&nbsp; Where does the clock cycle of a chip come in? What determines what that is?&nbsp;
[00:39:08] And what is a clock cycle of a chip? At baseline, it's worth observing&nbsp;&nbsp; that chips are incredibly parallel. You've got 100 billion transistors in a chip.&nbsp; A key thing you need to do whenever you&nbsp; have massive parallelism is synchronize&nbsp;&nbsp; between the different parallel units. In software, typically you have these very&nbsp;&nbsp; expensive synchronization methods like a mutex. One thread will finish what it's doing,&nbsp;&nbsp; grab a lock stored somewhere in memory,&nbsp; and notify the other thread that it's done.&nbsp; On chips, we take a very different approach. Every nanosecond or so, all circuitry in the chip&nbsp;&nbsp; will pause for a moment and synchronize. That is the clock cycle.&nbsp; The entire chip typically goes in lockstep&nbsp; to the next operation in one fell swoop.&nbsp; What this looks like in circuitry is that&nbsp; the clock is mediated by registers, which&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:40:17] are these storage devices we've drawn elsewhere. The way to think of it is: I have some storage&nbsp;&nbsp; holding a bit, which might be 0 or 1. Then I have some cloud of logic,&nbsp;&nbsp; which maybe is this systolic array or multiplier. I have a bunch of inputs feeding into this cloud&nbsp;&nbsp; of logic, and eventually there's going to&nbsp; be some output register that it writes to.&nbsp; There is a global clock signal&nbsp; driving all these registers.&nbsp; At a certain instance in time, when the clock&nbsp; strikes, whatever value happens to be on that&nbsp;&nbsp; wire at that instant is what gets stored. The challenge is that I would like to have&nbsp;&nbsp; my clock speed run as fast as possible. If I run at two gigahertz, I get twice as&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:41:19] many operations done per second&nbsp; as if I run at one gigahertz.&nbsp; But what that ends up meaning is that I'm very&nbsp; sensitive to the delay through this cloud of&nbsp;&nbsp; logic, because any computation happening in there&nbsp; needs to finish before the next clock cycle hits.&nbsp; A major point of optimization on any chip&nbsp; is to make this delay as short as possible.&nbsp; Interesting. The constraint here seems&nbsp; to be that if you add too much logic,&nbsp;&nbsp; you might risk missing the clock cycle. But if you don't add enough, you're&nbsp;&nbsp; leaving potential compute on the table. Is there ever a situation where you take&nbsp;&nbsp; a probabilistic chance that a computation&nbsp; finishes, or is it strictly that it either&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:42:23] finishes by the clock cycle or it doesn't? In standard chip design, you margin it such&nbsp;&nbsp; that there is a probability, but&nbsp; it's many standard deviations out.&nbsp; For all intents and purposes, it is a&nbsp; reliable part and will always meet the clock.&nbsp; There are some weird exceptions, like clock domain&nbsp; crossings where you go from one clock to another.&nbsp; Then you actually do have to&nbsp; reason about this probability.&nbsp; But in the main path, you margin it such that&nbsp; you'll get there 25% of the clock cycle in&nbsp;&nbsp; advance, making it very unlikely that it misses. Where the clocks synchronize, where the&nbsp;&nbsp; registers are, is this something&nbsp; you determine as a chip designer?&nbsp; Or is it an artifact where you want a certain&nbsp; sequence of logic, and the software you use to&nbsp;&nbsp; convert your Verilog into what you send to&nbsp; TSMC just determines that to make it work,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:43:25] you have to put a register here, here, and&nbsp; here, making sure no single step makes the&nbsp;&nbsp; whole chip's clock cycle longer than it has to be? Inserting them is actually a huge part of the&nbsp;&nbsp; work of designing a chip. It's done by a combination&nbsp;&nbsp; of manual and automatic methods. To show the very dumb version of&nbsp;&nbsp; what you can do here, you can take&nbsp; this logic and split it in half.&nbsp; Instead of just one cloud of logic, I can have two&nbsp; smaller clouds of logic that do the same thing,&nbsp;&nbsp; but split them up by a register. If you split it in the middle,&nbsp;&nbsp; you can hit twice the clock frequency. That's great, you get twice the performance,&nbsp;&nbsp; but at the cost of an extra&nbsp; register, which means more storage.&nbsp; Stepping back, why do we need&nbsp; to synchronize the whole chip?&nbsp;
[00:44:25] If you imagine playing Factorio or&nbsp; something, there's no global clock cycle.&nbsp; Things are just done when they're done. There's iron on the plate, and you can&nbsp;&nbsp; take it if you want. Taking that analogy,&nbsp;&nbsp; the thing you need to be mindful of is if I&nbsp; have two different paths through some logic.&nbsp; Say I have to do computation&nbsp; f here and computation g here,&nbsp;&nbsp; and they're going to meet for computation h. There's going to be manufacturing variance.&nbsp; In some chips f will take a little longer;&nbsp; in some chips g will take a little longer.&nbsp; If I have a signal propagating through, and&nbsp; the results from f and g have to meet up at h,&nbsp;&nbsp; what can go wrong is that f gets&nbsp; there early and it meets the previous&nbsp;&nbsp; value of g, or the next value of g. Ah. And h needs to know when to start,&nbsp;&nbsp; when the next iteration has… Exactly.&nbsp; This explains why different chips made&nbsp; at the same process node, the same TSMC&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:45:32] technology, can have different clock cycles. Two chips made at 3 nm might have different clock&nbsp;&nbsp; cycles based on whether they were able to optimize&nbsp; to ensure no single critical path is so long that&nbsp;&nbsp; it slows down the whole chip's clock cycle. That's right. This optimization I showed here&nbsp;&nbsp; is called pipeline register insertion. We've inserted a register in the&nbsp;&nbsp; middle of the pipeline. This is a pure trade-off&nbsp;&nbsp; between clock speed and area. That is the easy case.&nbsp; There is a harder case too. I drew out a pipeline of logic,&nbsp;&nbsp; but in other cases you may have some calculation&nbsp; which actually feeds back in on itself.&nbsp; It runs some function f and&nbsp; then writes back to itself.&nbsp; For example, this might be an addition where&nbsp; you're adding a number every clock cycle.&nbsp;
[00:46:43] This little circuit essentially sums all the&nbsp; numbers presented on different clock cycles.&nbsp; The challenge is, if this plus&nbsp; takes too long, what can I do?&nbsp; If I try to put a pipeline register&nbsp; right in the middle of it, it&nbsp;&nbsp; changes the computation that's done. Instead of forming a running sum&nbsp;&nbsp; of everything that comes in, I will&nbsp; actually have two different running sums.&nbsp; I'll end up with a running sum of the even&nbsp; numbers and a running sum of the odd numbers.&nbsp; This constraint—where I have a loop in my logic,&nbsp; which all chips have somewhere—is the hardest&nbsp;&nbsp; thing to address and sets the clock cycle. I don't understand why it would be&nbsp;&nbsp; a problem to have that. I'm not even sure what it&nbsp;&nbsp; would mean to have a register there. Is it a sort of atomic operation?&nbsp; Well, plus is not really atomic. As you just demonstrated.&nbsp; It took a whole lot of work to do a summation. You can take the early parts of that work,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:47:45] stick a register in the middle, and&nbsp; then take the late parts of that work.&nbsp; Okay. TSMC offers a PDK which&nbsp; specifies the primitives of&nbsp;&nbsp; logic they can grant you in the chip. It's up to them to determine that no&nbsp;&nbsp; primitive is bigger than the clock cycle&nbsp; they're hoping a process node targets.&nbsp; But other than that, can't you just take&nbsp; all the primitives from TSMC and keep adding&nbsp;&nbsp; registers between them as much as needed&nbsp; until you get to your desired clock cycle?&nbsp; As a logic designer, the chip&nbsp; architect sets the clock cycle.&nbsp; For example, the primitives you get from TSMC&nbsp; are on the order of AND gates or full adders.&nbsp; It depends a lot on voltage and which library you&nbsp; choose, but generally you can have about 10, 20,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:48:46] or 30 of these sequentially in a clock cycle. These primitives are very fast,&nbsp;&nbsp; maybe 10 picoseconds. As a logic designer, in principle,&nbsp;&nbsp; if you just had a register and an AND gate in a&nbsp; loop, you could get an insanely fast clock speed,&nbsp;&nbsp; more than four, five, or six gigahertz. But if you take this really simple circuit&nbsp;&nbsp; and look at the area you're spending&nbsp; here… This is called one gate equivalent&nbsp;&nbsp; in size, so unit of one in area. This thing is maybe a unit of eight in area.&nbsp; Again, almost all your cost&nbsp; becomes synchronization or&nbsp;&nbsp; communication cost compared to the actual logic. This would be a case where you've gone too far.&nbsp; You've made your clock speed really&nbsp; fast at the cost of spending almost&nbsp;&nbsp; all of your area on pipeline registers. Interesting. So you're hinting at a dynamic&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:49:50] where you can have a really fast clock speed&nbsp; but you're not getting that much work done.&nbsp; You can have low latency but low throughput. It hurts your throughput, in fact, because&nbsp;&nbsp; the throughput of your chip is the product of&nbsp; how much you get done per clock cycle—which&nbsp;&nbsp; is based on area efficiency—times&nbsp; how many clocks you get per second.&nbsp; This is actually so similar to the thing we&nbsp; were discussing last time about batch size,&nbsp;&nbsp; where if you have a low batch size, any one&nbsp; user can receive their next token really fast,&nbsp;&nbsp; but the total number of tokens processed in, say,&nbsp; an hour will be lower than it could otherwise be.&nbsp; Exactly. You get less parallelism out if&nbsp; you drive your clock speed up really high.&nbsp; Language models are starting to compete&nbsp; against the best human forecasters.&nbsp; I sat down with two senior Jane Streeters, Ron&nbsp; Minsky and Dan Pontecorvo, and asked: at some&nbsp;&nbsp; point, does AI just do what Jane Street does? There's a world that we should take seriously&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:50:52] where, you know, we're going to build large&nbsp; language models or some other AI systems that&nbsp;&nbsp; are like strictly smarter than all humans on the&nbsp; planet and more capable at all cognitive tasks.&nbsp; Trading in particular feels to me as like kind&nbsp; of AGI complete, sort of like NP complete,&nbsp;&nbsp; because at the end of the day trading involves&nbsp; figuring out what things are worth, which means&nbsp;&nbsp; making predictions about the future. Jane Street isn't betting against AI.&nbsp; They just signed a six&nbsp; billion dollar compute deal.&nbsp; But Ron's view is that the edge keeps moving. I have never been more desperate to hire more&nbsp;&nbsp; engineers and more traders than I am today. You know, you have the usual thing of like&nbsp;&nbsp; the other hard parts that we&nbsp; don't yet know how to automate.&nbsp; Well, that ends up being where&nbsp; the competitive edge lies.&nbsp; You can find these open positions and watch&nbsp; the full interview at janestreet.com/dwarkesh.&nbsp; I remember talking to an FPGA engineer at&nbsp; Jane Street, Clark, who helped me prep for&nbsp;&nbsp; the previous interview we did together. He was explaining why they use FPGAs.&nbsp;
[00:51:55] I imagine that for high-frequency trading,&nbsp; throughput is less important than latency,&nbsp;&nbsp; so having very specific control over the clock&nbsp;&nbsp; cycle in a deterministic way&nbsp; is the most important thing.&nbsp; Maybe it'd be interesting to talk about why&nbsp; you can't just achieve that with an ASIC,&nbsp;&nbsp; or why you might use an FPGA to have deterministic&nbsp; clock cycles for high-frequency trading.&nbsp; Let's consider the business&nbsp; case for an FPGA versus an ASIC.&nbsp; FPGAs and ASICs use largely&nbsp; the same conceptual model.&nbsp; You have a series of gates built from small&nbsp; primitives—ANDs, ORs, XORs—connected together&nbsp;&nbsp; with wires running in a fixed clock cycle. Anything you can express in an FPGA you&nbsp;&nbsp; can express in an ASIC too. It will be about an order of&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:52:55] magnitude cheaper and have better energy&nbsp; efficiency on an ASIC than an FPGA.&nbsp; The trade-off is that the first FPGA costs you&nbsp; $10,000, whereas the first ASIC you make costs $30&nbsp;&nbsp; million because it requires an entire tape-out. The business use case for an FPGA is when you want&nbsp;&nbsp; something that has very deterministic&nbsp; latency, fast runtime, and high parallelism,&nbsp;&nbsp; but you are going to change the&nbsp; workload frequently, maybe every month.&nbsp; You don't want to pay that&nbsp; tape-out cost every time.&nbsp; How does an FPGA actually emulate the ASIC&nbsp; programming model in a fixed piece of hardware?&nbsp; At its core, it has the two&nbsp; components we just talked about.&nbsp; It has registers as storage&nbsp; devices, and it has lookup tables&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:54:03] (LUTs) which provide all of the gates. Then there's a third component.&nbsp; We have a swarm of these registers and LUTs,&nbsp; and they are connected by a big set of muxes.&nbsp; In front of every single one of these, we have a&nbsp; mux which selects an input from everywhere else.&nbsp; We have a whole bunch of different&nbsp; options feeding into all of these things.&nbsp; What this allows is essentially that when&nbsp; I program my FPGA, I can take all of these&nbsp;&nbsp; components and superimpose a particular wiring&nbsp; which goes through this LUT, feed it into another&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:55:10] LUT, send it to this register, and then feed&nbsp; it into another LUT, or something like that.&nbsp; What I've drawn in orange is how you…&nbsp; FPGA means Field-Programmable Gate Array.&nbsp; The orange is what has been programmed in&nbsp; the field, whereas the white is all the&nbsp;&nbsp; wires that must exist in the FPGA in order to&nbsp; actually make the device in the first place.&nbsp; What does it mean to be programmed in the field? Programmed in the field means the device is&nbsp;&nbsp; being deployed in a data center. It's sitting out in the world,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then you can come and program it. Ah, not field as in like electric field.&nbsp; Field as in like out there in the world, ok. If I look at how the field programming comes&nbsp;&nbsp; out of the first lookup table and goes&nbsp; into a second one, how does that work?&nbsp; Where are the wires that make that happen? I got a little bit lazy in drawing all of these.&nbsp; Every single device here has a mux sitting in&nbsp; front of it, which can select from all of the&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:56:11] nearby circuits that are available. The actual configuration of the&nbsp;&nbsp; FPGA amounts to the mux control. In this mux, we have the data inputs,&nbsp;&nbsp; and we have the control that selects. There's a little storage device sitting next&nbsp;&nbsp; to every single one of these muxes saying, "This&nbsp; is where you're going to source your input from."&nbsp; Programming it consists of configuring&nbsp; every single one of these muxes.&nbsp; That makes sense. What is happening&nbsp; inside of the lookup table?&nbsp; The lookup table is also going to have a&nbsp; little bit of control telling it what to do.&nbsp; Its purpose is to configurably&nbsp; take the role of an AND gate,&nbsp;&nbsp; OR gate, XOR, or any of those different things. There are many ways you could consider doing that.&nbsp; The way it's done in traditional&nbsp; FPGAs… A lookup table has four bits&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:57:25] of input and one bit of output. How many different functions are&nbsp;&nbsp; there from four bits to one bit? There are 16 different functions.&nbsp; You can tabulate this as 16 different numbers. You've got a table of 0111001, 16 entries.&nbsp; This table is stored in&nbsp; this blue configuration bit.&nbsp; It views these four bits as binary, looks up the&nbsp; relevant row of the table, and emits that bit.&nbsp; This is essentially a truth-table&nbsp; view of lookup tables.&nbsp; Okay, so if you think about an AND gate, OR gate,&nbsp; NOR gate, XOR gate, these all take as input…&nbsp; Those are two-input functions. Sometimes we have&nbsp; a three-input function, like a three-way XOR,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:58:25] or a four-way XOR. In this case,&nbsp;&nbsp; does it just depend on how big it is? The typical size for LUTs is four inputs.&nbsp; It's sort of just a sweet spot. There’s another compute vs. communication&nbsp;&nbsp; trade-off here. If it has too&nbsp;&nbsp; few inputs, you need to use more LUTs. Basically the lookup table is a truth table.&nbsp; With a truth table, you can&nbsp; program in any gate you want.&nbsp; So instead of a lookup table, you can&nbsp; just think of it as a programmable gate.&nbsp; That's right. One of the things you can do&nbsp; here is you can see where the rule of thumb&nbsp;&nbsp; that an FPGA is an order of magnitude&nbsp; more expensive than an ASIC comes from.&nbsp; You count how many gates would&nbsp; be inside this lookup table.&nbsp; We can view this lookup table&nbsp; essentially as one of these muxes.&nbsp; It has to select between 16 different values,&nbsp;&nbsp; so it's a mux with n=16 options and p=1 bits. As we saw earlier, this circuit&nbsp;&nbsp;
[00:59:37] costs n times p many gates. So it costs np, which is 16,&nbsp;&nbsp; AND gates, and also 16 ORs. This circuit being the mux?&nbsp; Exactly, the mux. The mux that goes into the lookup table?&nbsp; The lookup table itself you can think of&nbsp; as being a big mux that selects from all 16&nbsp;&nbsp; rows down to one output. That's the lookup table.&nbsp; But the way you've drawn it here,&nbsp; there's a mux and then a lookup table.&nbsp; It's muxes all the way down. There is a second mux that is inside here.&nbsp; This mux is this mux. And the other mux is just saying…&nbsp; where it came from in this mess of gates. Right, and the second mux is, "Okay,&nbsp;&nbsp; now you have one value, but that&nbsp; value is still a four-bit value."&nbsp; Yeah, I've selected four bits from the soup. Then I use those four bits to select which&nbsp;&nbsp; entry in the lookup table I'm going to use. Suppose in the first mux you're pulling&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:00:45] from eight nearby registers as input. That's a total of 32 bits going in.&nbsp; Out of that, four bits come out. Those four bits go into the second mux,&nbsp;&nbsp; which is inside the lookup table. In this case, these registers&nbsp;&nbsp; are single-bit registers. If there are eight nearby&nbsp;&nbsp; registers and lookup tables, then I&nbsp; have eight bits total coming in nearby.&nbsp; I select from eight down to four different values. There are actually four different muxes, a little&nbsp;&nbsp; mux associated with each of these input bits. Each of them is selecting one out of eight.&nbsp; Where are those eight coming from? Nearby registers and other LUTs.&nbsp; Each register is one bit. Yes.&nbsp; I guess AMD or whoever makes these FPGAs&nbsp; still has to be opinionated about which&nbsp;&nbsp; registers are connected to which registers. You can program in the actual gates,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:01:47] but they add a wire in the connect…&nbsp; the communication topology, right?&nbsp; You get flexibility at a local grain. There's a nearby neighborhood you can select from,&nbsp;&nbsp; but for more coarse, long-distance&nbsp; connections, they form an opinion on that.&nbsp; And the reason it's 10x slower is why? If you look at the cost of building this&nbsp;&nbsp; lookup table, it's 32 gates. It can give me the equivalent&nbsp;&nbsp; of—what’s an interesting thing I&nbsp; can do here—a four-way AND gate.&nbsp; A four-way AND means AND, AND,&nbsp; and then an AND of an AND.&nbsp; This is a circuit I could implement in&nbsp; an ASIC directly using three AND gates.&nbsp; Using a LUT, I can also implement it, but&nbsp; it's going to take 32 gates instead of three.&nbsp;
[01:02:47] So the overhead is really coming from&nbsp; the fact that there's a more concise&nbsp;&nbsp; way to describe a truth table than listing out&nbsp; every single possible combination of inputs,&nbsp;&nbsp; which is just to write out the gate. Yes, to place down the polysilicon&nbsp;&nbsp; and the wires and so on. Interesting. One important point you&nbsp;&nbsp; made to me is that the reason they prefer FPGAs to&nbsp; CPUs is that they get deterministic clock cycles.&nbsp; They know when a packet will come in and go out. Why isn't that a guarantee in CPUs?&nbsp; You can actually design a CPU that&nbsp; has deterministic latency as well.&nbsp; In fact, the processors inside a lot of&nbsp; AI chips also have deterministic latency.&nbsp; Groq has advertised this. TPUs&nbsp; have that in the core as well.&nbsp; The challenge is getting deterministic&nbsp; latency and high speed at the same time.&nbsp;
[01:03:53] Non-deterministic latency comes from&nbsp; specific design choices in a CPU.&nbsp; It's actually possible to remove those design&nbsp; choices and make a CPU with deterministic latency,&nbsp;&nbsp; but those are not very attractive in the&nbsp; market, so people don't make those CPUs anymore.&nbsp; In some sense, deterministic latency is a simpler&nbsp; starting point, and some chip designers have&nbsp;&nbsp; added things in to make it non-deterministic. To take a concrete example, probably the most&nbsp;&nbsp; important source of non-determinism&nbsp; on a CPU is the CPU cache itself.&nbsp; In a CPU, you have the CPU die itself,&nbsp; and then DDR memory off on the side.&nbsp;
[01:04:54] You have a cache system inside that remembers&nbsp; recent accesses to DDR and stores them.&nbsp; When I'm running through my&nbsp; CPU instructions, every time&nbsp;&nbsp; I have an instruction that accesses memory, it&nbsp; first checks if the data was stored in the cache.&nbsp; If not, it fetches it from DDR. This is a huge optimization.&nbsp; The cache is two orders of&nbsp; magnitude faster than the DDR.&nbsp; If you never used the cache, basically all&nbsp; programs would run a hundred times slower.&nbsp; The presence of a cache is absolutely necessary&nbsp; for a CPU to run at a reasonable speed.&nbsp; But whether or not you get a cache hit&nbsp; depends on the ambient environment of the CPU:&nbsp;&nbsp; what other programs are running, what has&nbsp; run recently, and what the random number&nbsp;&nbsp; generator inside the cache system is doing. That is a big source of non-determinism&nbsp;&nbsp; in the runtime of a CPU. That is the memory system for a CPU.&nbsp;
[01:06:01] The big thing you can do differently&nbsp; is, instead of having the hardware say,&nbsp;&nbsp; "I’m going to read memory" and then the&nbsp; hardware decides whether or not it comes&nbsp;&nbsp; from the cache, you can bake this decision&nbsp; into software, a different design philosophy.&nbsp; You see this in TPUs, for example. I'll draw the same diagram,&nbsp;&nbsp; but I'll call it a scratchpad. The main difference is… This would be a TPU,&nbsp;&nbsp; and you have HBM in this case rather than&nbsp; DDR, but it's still an off-chip memory.&nbsp; Instead of the software saying "first access&nbsp; memory" and letting the hardware decide,&nbsp;&nbsp; you have one kind of instruction that goes to&nbsp; the scratchpad and a totally different kind&nbsp;&nbsp; of instruction that goes to HBM. This style is generically known&nbsp;&nbsp; as scratchpad instead of cache. The key distinction is that you have&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:07:04] one kind of instruction that says "read or write&nbsp; scratchpad," and a totally different instruction&nbsp;&nbsp; that says "read or write HBM." So scratchpad being the cache.&nbsp; Yeah, this thing here is the scratchpad. Stepping way back: people say computers have the&nbsp;&nbsp; "von Neumann architecture", where there's&nbsp; this serial processing of information.&nbsp; Maybe it's just because we've&nbsp; been talking about parallel&nbsp;&nbsp; accelerators, but the FPGA is super parallel. The AI accelerators, the TPUs, are super parallel.&nbsp; Even CPUs are super parallel if you&nbsp; think about all the cores they have.&nbsp; In what sense is modern hardware&nbsp; actually the von Neumann architecture?&nbsp; Is that actually a fair way&nbsp; to describe modern hardware?&nbsp; I think it's a fair way to describe CPUs. The amount of parallelism you get on a CPU is&nbsp;&nbsp; about 100 cores times maybe 16-way vector&nbsp; units, so about 1,000-way parallelism on a CPU.&nbsp;
[01:08:06] One question: there is a die being used for&nbsp; the CPU, and if there are fewer threads,&nbsp;&nbsp; just as a matter of transistor voltages&nbsp; switching on and off, is it that there's&nbsp;&nbsp; literally one control flow—a small part of the&nbsp; die—where voltages are switching on and off?&nbsp; How do you actually occupy the die area of a CPU… If there are so few cores, what are&nbsp;&nbsp; you spending all of the die on? Yeah, what is happening there?&nbsp; The cores are just much&nbsp; bigger and more complicated.&nbsp; We should compare a CPU core, which takes&nbsp; up one one-hundredth of the die, to a LUT.&nbsp; A LUT is only 16 gates. It's clear why there are so many&nbsp;&nbsp; more LUTs in an FPGA than cores in a CPU. But why are there more CUDA cores,&nbsp;&nbsp; for example, than CPU cores? What's the difference between a CPU and a GPU?&nbsp;
[01:09:13] Inside the CPU, one big use&nbsp; of the area is the cache.&nbsp; Very little is actually the ALUs. Mostly it's these register&nbsp;&nbsp; files rather than the logic units. Both of those have equivalents in a GPU,&nbsp;&nbsp; so that's not a big difference. But the thing that does not have&nbsp;&nbsp; an equivalent in a GPU is the branch predictor. There is a whole big area in the CPU which is&nbsp;&nbsp; just a bunch of predictors saying when the next&nbsp; branch will be and where the branch target is.&nbsp; Stripping a lot of that out, as well&nbsp; as making these register files tighter,&nbsp;&nbsp; drives a lot of the GPU gains over the CPU. What is the purpose of the branch predictor?&nbsp; To execute both branches at&nbsp; once, or what does it do?&nbsp;
[01:10:13] The issue is that when I've got a series&nbsp; of instructions, if I have a branch,&nbsp;&nbsp; the actual step of processing an&nbsp; instruction takes a really long time.&nbsp; It takes maybe five nanoseconds. The time to notice that I've got a branch,&nbsp;&nbsp; evaluate whether the Boolean is true, update&nbsp; the program counter to the new target,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then read from the instruction memory&nbsp; could take five nanoseconds to finish.&nbsp; So in reality, this may&nbsp; finish somewhere down here.&nbsp; I want to run a clock speed that is much&nbsp; faster than what five nanoseconds allows.&nbsp; Five nanoseconds is a 200 MHz clock speed. I would like to run at one or two gigahertz.&nbsp;
[01:11:13] So I need to run other instructions&nbsp; while the branch is being evaluated.&nbsp; I just want to keep running the&nbsp; instructions that happen after me.&nbsp; But that might have been wrong. If the branch ended up being taken, then&nbsp;&nbsp; I need to know that instead of evaluating these&nbsp; instructions, I actually need to jump to wherever&nbsp;&nbsp; the target is and run those instructions instead. The purpose of the branch predictor is to predict,&nbsp;&nbsp; five cycles earlier, that a branch is going to&nbsp; happen, before you even get to that instruction.&nbsp; If I think about how the brain works&nbsp; versus what you're describing here,&nbsp;&nbsp; at a high level the differences might be that&nbsp; while you can do structured sparsity in these&nbsp;&nbsp; accelerators and save yourself some area that you&nbsp; would have otherwise had to dedicate to gates,&nbsp;&nbsp; in the brain there's unstructured sparsity. Any neuron can connect to any other neuron, and&nbsp;&nbsp; not in ways where they have the column aligned. Then there's the fact that memory&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:12:18] and compute are co-located. Although I guess you could say in a way the memory&nbsp;&nbsp; and compute are co-located on these dies too. This is exactly the co-location,&nbsp;&nbsp; in some sense, of the memory and compute. So maybe that isn't a big difference.&nbsp; Another big difference is that the clock cycle&nbsp; on the brain is much slower than on computers.&nbsp; Partly that's to preserve energy, because the&nbsp; faster the clock cycle, the bigger the voltage&nbsp;&nbsp; needs to be in order for the signal to settle&nbsp; and to identify what state a transistor is in.&nbsp; That’s right. I don't know if&nbsp;&nbsp; you have any commentary on what the brain&nbsp; might be doing versus how these chips work.&nbsp; Let's take the clock speed one first. The clock speed is quite high on a&nbsp;&nbsp; chip because that drives higher throughput. When we compare a GPU running some workload,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:13:26] it's running batch size 1,000. Whereas the brain is not running&nbsp;&nbsp; batch size 1,000, there's only one of me. You could imagine saying, "Take a GPU and&nbsp;&nbsp; instead of running at a gigahertz, run&nbsp; it at a megahertz," and that would start&nbsp;&nbsp; to look a little more like the equivalent&nbsp; things you're talking about in the brain.&nbsp; But in the way silicon works, that does not give&nbsp; you a 1,000x advantage in energy efficiency.&nbsp; What it ends up looking like is you just&nbsp; run this circuit once to stabilization,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then it will sit idle&nbsp; for a long period of time.&nbsp; It doesn't consume a lot of&nbsp; energy while it's sitting&nbsp;&nbsp; idle because most of the energy is consumed&nbsp; in toggling bits from zero to one and back.&nbsp; Let's talk about the energy&nbsp; consumption of a circuit like this.&nbsp;
[01:14:26] The way to think of a bit being stored is that&nbsp; you've deposited some charge in a capacitor&nbsp;&nbsp; sitting somewhere in the chip implicitly. It becomes charged when the bit becomes a one,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then it becomes discharged&nbsp; when it next goes to a zero.&nbsp; That cycle of charging the capacitor&nbsp; and then dumping that charge out&nbsp;&nbsp; to ground is where the energy is consumed. This is called the dynamic or switching power,&nbsp;&nbsp; and it's most of the energy consumption of a chip. There is some other energy consumption just&nbsp;&nbsp; coming from the fact that insulators&nbsp; aren't perfect, but we'll discard that.&nbsp; Most of the energy consumption comes from&nbsp; toggling from zero to one and back to zero.&nbsp; If you run a chip much slower and you only&nbsp; clock it once every thousand clock cycles,&nbsp;&nbsp; you will have 1,000 times fewer transitions. It will be about 1,000 times&nbsp;&nbsp; less energy consumption. But it's not a substantial&nbsp;&nbsp; advantage in energy efficiency. Okay, so you described how a TPU&nbsp;&nbsp; works at a high level. What is the difference&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:15:29] at a high level between how a GPU and a TPU work? There is a high-level organization principle that&nbsp;&nbsp; is different, and then inside&nbsp; the cores things are different.&nbsp; Looking at the high level, we'll&nbsp; take a GPU and a TPU and see what&nbsp;&nbsp; the top-level block structure looks like. If you think of this as the whole chip&nbsp;&nbsp; in each case, the organization&nbsp; of the GPU is mostly a bunch of&nbsp;&nbsp; almost-identical units, which are the SMs. They've got an L2 memory in the middle,&nbsp;&nbsp; and then a bunch more of these SMs on the bottom. So there is a fairly regular grid of cores.&nbsp; If we look at a TPU in comparison, you end&nbsp; up with much coarser-grained units of logic.&nbsp;
[01:16:34] You end up with just a few matrix units,&nbsp; which are the big systolic arrays.&nbsp; In the middle you've got some vector unit, and&nbsp; then you've got your matrix units at the bottom.&nbsp; These matrix units with a vector unit in&nbsp; the middle make up the whole TPU chip.&nbsp; You can think of scaling this thing&nbsp; down into a really tiny unit with a&nbsp;&nbsp; smaller matrix unit and a smaller vector&nbsp; unit, and that is sort of what an SM is.&nbsp; From a very high-level point of view, the GPU has&nbsp; a lot of tiny TPUs tiled across the whole chip.&nbsp; Oh, interesting. You're suggesting the tensor&nbsp; core within a streaming SM is analogous to an MXU?&nbsp; Yeah, it's all very similar. I see. If you had more lack of structure,&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:17:38] having a bunch of tiny TPUs makes a lot of sense. Whereas if you just have huge matrix&nbsp;&nbsp; multiplications, you might want to avoid the&nbsp; cost of having individual SMs with their own&nbsp;&nbsp; registers and warp schedulers. Why not just make a huge thing&nbsp;&nbsp; and amortize those costs across the whole thing? This shows up in how large you can grow things.&nbsp; We've seen this theme, especially with the&nbsp; systolic array, where a larger systolic&nbsp;&nbsp; array amortizes the register file costs better. This design allows you to have larger systolic&nbsp;&nbsp; arrays, whereas the GPU design constrains&nbsp; you to having small units of everything.&nbsp; There is a trade-off, however. Because of this coarse-grained&nbsp;&nbsp; separation of things, you need to move a lot of&nbsp; data from the vector unit to the matrix units,&nbsp;&nbsp; through just two lines of perimeter here. If you look at the equivalent thing&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:18:46] in a GPU, you've got vector units everywhere, and&nbsp; you can move data through many different lines.&nbsp; The amount of data you can move between a&nbsp; vector unit and a matrix unit is actually&nbsp;&nbsp; much higher in a GPU than in a TPU. Instead of having to move all the data&nbsp;&nbsp; through just two lines, you're moving&nbsp; it through 16 lines of wiring in a GPU.&nbsp; Right. But also you might&nbsp; have to move across less area.&nbsp; Which is an energy saving as well. So if you can operate entirely within&nbsp;&nbsp; an SM, the data movement is much smaller. But the moment you want to operate across SMs,&nbsp;&nbsp; it becomes more complicated and expensive. So you don’t have to comment, but one might&nbsp;&nbsp; expect that a thing MatX might try to do&nbsp; is get the GPU-like smaller structure of&nbsp;&nbsp; systolic arrays surrounded by SRAM, but at the&nbsp; same time make it so that the things you need in&nbsp;&nbsp;
[01:19:55] an SM to support the CUDA architecture—which&nbsp; take a bunch of space—you might discard.&nbsp; We've talked publicly about something we&nbsp; call a splittable systolic array, which&nbsp;&nbsp; in some sense you can think of as big systolic&nbsp; arrays that can be small systolic arrays too.&nbsp; Cool. Okay, I think that's&nbsp; a good note to close on.&nbsp; Reiner, thank you so much. Thanks, Dwarkesh.
